.TH HASHGEN 1 "June 2025" "hashgen 1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
hashgen \- calculate cryptographic hashes using various algorithms
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hashgen
.B --algorithm=
.I ALGORITHM
.br
.B hashgen
.B -a
.I ALGORITHM
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hashgen
calculates cryptographic hashes of data read from standard input using the specified algorithm and outputs the result to standard output.

The program supports multiple hash algorithms including MD5, SHA-1, and SHA-256, with a unified interface for all algorithms.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --algorithm=\fIALGORITHM\fP
Specify the hash algorithm to use. Required parameter.
.TP
.B -a \fIALGORITHM\fP
Short form of --algorithm.
.TP
.B --help, -h
Display help message and exit.
.TP
.B --list
List all supported algorithms and exit.

.SH SUPPORTED ALGORITHMS
.TP
.B MD5
128-bit MD5 hash algorithm (RFC 1321)
.TP
.B SHA1
160-bit SHA-1 hash algorithm (FIPS 180-4)
.TP
.B SHA128
Alias for SHA-1 (160-bit output)
.TP
.B SHA256
256-bit SHA-256 hash algorithm (FIPS 180-4)

.SH FEATURES
.TP
.B Stream Processing
Efficiently processes large files using a 32KB internal buffer, allowing unlimited input size with constant memory usage.
.TP
.B Memory Efficient
Uses minimal memory (less than 50KB) regardless of input size.
.TP
.B Standard Compliance
Implements algorithms according to their respective specifications (FIPS 180-4, RFC 1321).
.TP
.B Security Hardened
Includes bounds checking, overflow protection, and secure memory handling.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Calculate SHA256 hash of a file:
.B hashgen --algorithm=sha256 < file.txt

.TP
Calculate MD5 hash of a string:
.B echo -n "hello world" | hashgen -a md5

.TP
Calculate SHA-1 hash of command output:
.B ls -la | hashgen --algorithm=sha1

.TP
List supported algorithms:
.B hashgen --list

.TP
Get help:
.B hashgen --help

.SH OUTPUT FORMAT
The output is a single line containing the hexadecimal representation of the hash, followed by a newline. Hash length depends on the algorithm:
.TP
MD5: 32 hex characters (128 bits)
.TP
SHA-1: 40 hex characters (160 bits)
.TP
SHA-256: 64 hex characters (256 bits)

.SH PERFORMANCE
.TP
.B Throughput
Typically processes 100-500 MB/s depending on hardware and algorithm.
.TP
.B Memory Usage
Constant O(1) memory usage regardless of input size.
.TP
.B Scalability
Can process arbitrarily large files without loading them into memory.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.B hashgen
exits with status 0 on success, 1 on error.

.SH STANDARDS
This implementation conforms to:
.TP
.B FIPS 180-4
Secure Hash Standard (SHA-1, SHA-256)
.TP
.B RFC 1321
The MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm

.SH VERIFICATION
The implementation includes test vectors from official specifications to ensure correctness.

.SH COMPATIBILITY
Output format is compatible with other standard hash tools when using the same algorithm.

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project maintainer.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR openssl (1),
.BR shasum (1),
.BR md5sum (1)

.SH AUTHOR
Generic hash calculator with multiple algorithm support.

.SH COPYRIGHT
This implementation is provided as-is for educational and practical use.
